Boundary: clarify public_cluster_addr and document load balancing (#3177)
hashicorp/web-unified-docs: content/boundary/v0.19.x/content/docs/architecture/load-balancing.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Load balancing Boundary controllers
description: >-
  Configure load balancing for Boundary's API and cluster listeners, which have opposite requirements, using public_cluster_addr and initial_upstreams settings.
---

# Load balancing Boundary controllers

> Boundary controllers expose two listeners with different load balancing

Reviewer: I don't understand this paragraph.

> requirements. Load balance the API listener, which serves clients: round-robin
> across controllers is supported and recommended. Do not load balance worker
> traffic across the cluster listener. Workers balance across controllers
> themselves, and a load balancer at that layer breaks it. Use one only to serve
> a worker's first connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requirements. Load balancing the API listener, which serves clients, is supported. We recommend
using a round-robin configuration across controllers. 

Do not load balance worker traffic across the cluster listener, however. Workers balance themselves across controllers
themselves, and a load balancer at that layer breaks it. Use one only to serve
a worker's first connection.
```

Reviewer: This paragraph turned out a little dense. I'm not sure if I understood it 100%.

## Context

> Clients reach the API listener on port `9200` by default. Workers reach the
> cluster listener on port `9201` by default. The two serve unrelated traffic, and
> each controller runs both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clients reach the API listener on port `9200` by default. Workers reach the
cluster listener on port `9201` by default. The two listeners serve unrelated traffic, and
a controller runs each.
```

Reviewer: 1 controller per listener? I'm not sure if I understand what "each controller runs both" means.

Refer to [System requirements](/boundary/docs/architecture/system-requirements)
for the full set of ports and network paths.

## Load balance the API listener

For the highest levels of reliability and stability, we recommend that you use
some load balancing technology to distribute requests to your Boundary
controller nodes.

Boundary workers do not require any load balancing.

> The Boundary controller manages load balancing for the Boundary workers when
> clients initiate sessions to Boundary targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Boundary controller manages load balancing for workers when
clients initiate sessions to targets.
```

> To monitor the health of Boundary controller nodes, configure the load balancer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To monitor the health of controller nodes, configure the load balancer
```

| AWS   | Application         | 7     | [Application load balancer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/application/introduction.html) |
| Azure | Network             | 4     | [Azure load balancer](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/load-balancer/)                                      |
| Azure | Application         | 7     | [Azure application gateway](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/application-gateway/)                          |
| GCP   | Network/Application | 4/7   | [Cloud load balancing](https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/load-balancing-overview)                     |

There are also a number of self-hosted options, as well as service discovery
systems like Consul.

Refer to the [listener stanza](/boundary/docs/configuration/listeners)
documentation for more information about configuring operational endpoints.

## Worker connections and the cluster listener

Workers connect to the cluster listener, not the API listener. Do not place a
load balancer between workers and controllers as a permanent path for worker

> traffic, and do not round-robin across controllers at this layer. Workers

Reviewer: I'm not sure about using round-robin as a verb. It sounds like informal jargon to me.

> traffic, and do not round-robin across controllers at this layer. Workers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traffic, and do not configure round-robin load balancing across controllers at this layer. Workers
```

already balance across controllers themselves, and a load balancer in that
position defeats it.

> A load balancer has one supported role here: serving a worker's first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A load balancer has one supported role for the cluster listener, serving a worker's first
```

connection, as described in
[Use a load balancer for the initial connection](#use-a-load-balancer-for-the-initial-connection).
The guidance in this section applies only to the cluster listener, and it
differs from the guidance for
[the API listener](#load-balance-the-api-listener).

### How workers find controllers

A worker's `initial_upstreams` value tells it where to make its first
connection. After that connection succeeds, the controller returns the current
set of controller addresses, and the worker replaces its upstream list with

> that set. From then on the worker connects directly to individual controllers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the current set. From then on the worker connects directly to individual controllers
```

and balances across them itself.

> Each address in that set comes from one controller. If a controller sets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each address in that current set comes from one controller. If a controller sets
```

`public_cluster_addr`, Boundary advertises that value. If it does not, Boundary
advertises the address of that controller's `cluster` listener.

### `public_cluster_addr` is per controller

`public_cluster_addr` is not a single shared address for the cluster. Each
controller sets its own, and the value must be an address at which workers can
reach **that controller directly**.

Setting every controller to the same address, such as the address of a load

> balancer, defeats the worker's client-side load balancing: every worker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
balancer, defeats the worker's client-side load balancing. Every worker
```

connection resolves to whichever controller the load balancer happens to pick,
and the worker cannot distribute its connections or fail over between
controllers.

> The value is the cluster address, not the API address. If you omit the port,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `public_cluster_addr` value is the cluster address, not the API address. If you omit the port,
```

Boundary appends the default cluster port `9201`. Pointing this value at the API
port causes workers to connect to a listener that does not serve them.

Refer to
[`public_cluster_addr`](/boundary/docs/configuration/controller#public_cluster_addr)
for the parameter reference.

### Use a load balancer for the initial connection

You can put a load balancer in front of the cluster listeners to serve the
worker's first connection. Configure it as follows:

- Run the load balancer in TCP mode. The cluster listener does not carry HTTP
  traffic that a layer 7 load balancer can inspect.

> - Point it at each controller's cluster address, round robin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Point the load balancer at each controller's cluster address in a round-robin configuration.
```

- Set each worker's `initial_upstreams` to the address of the load balancer.
- Do not use the load balancer address as any controller's
  `public_cluster_addr`, and do not use it as a cluster listener address.

The load balancer serves the first connection only. After that, workers use the

> addresses the controller returned, so they connect to controllers directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
addresses the controller returned and connect to controllers directly.
```

### Proxy a single controller

> If you want a proxy in front of an individual controller's
> `public_cluster_addr`, that works, subject to two constraints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure a proxy in front of an individual controller's
`public_cluster_addr`, subject to two constraints.

The proxy must:
```

> - The proxy must run in TCP mode.
> - It must forward from one controller's `public_cluster_addr` to that same
>   controller's cluster listener, one to one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run in TCP mode.
- Forward the controller's `public_cluster_addr` to that same
  controller's cluster listener.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure what "one to one" means here. Is it just replacing the listener's `public_cluster_addr` with the controller's?

Do not balance across controllers at this layer. Doing so produces connectivity
problems and defeats the built-in client-side load balancing, for the reason
described in
[`public_cluster_addr` is per controller](#public_cluster_addr-is-per-controller).

## When you do not need a load balancer

A load balancer is not required for worker to controller traffic. If workers can
reach the controllers directly, you can list the controllers' cluster addresses
in each worker's `initial_upstreams` and set `public_cluster_addr` on each
controller as needed, with no load balancer or proxy involved.

Consider adding one when you want to:

- Change the set of controllers without editing every worker's

>   `initial_upstreams`. Workers reach the load balancer, and the controller set
>   they receive after connecting reflects the current controllers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `initial_upstreams`. Workers reach the load balancer and receive the current controller set
  after connecting.
```
